Welcome to the third webcast of the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group at Padma Samye Ling. So today
we'll be discussing the third chapter of Venerable Khenpo Rinpoches' book, "The Buddhist Path",
and the chapter is entitled "The Primordial Nature". So we'll begin with opening prayers and then
we'll
go into the discussion.
The Supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padma Sambala, which is the essential,
extraordinary viewing doctrine of the early translation school. You keep alive and spread
by the light of wisdom. Lord of dharma, great Khenpo, I pray at your lotus feet. In the palace
of the old man Dhammadattu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the one who shows
clearly the dharmakaya of my own mind, we pray to the honourable Rupur, a glorious true teacher,
precious one, dwelling on the lotus seat on the crown of my head. Hold me with your great kindness,
bestow the accomplishments of body, speech and mind.
Thanks everybody. So we divided this chapter, "The Primordial Nature" into three sections,
and so there's three points, one point for each section of the chapter, and so we'll hit these
points one by one, and so more or less we're dividing the chapter into thirds. So I'll just
give a really quick overview of the first section of this chapter, and then we'll go right to the
point. So for this first part of the chapter, Rinpoche's are distinguished between the way things
appear and the way they are, and the way things appear is relative truth, and the way things are
is absolute truth, and so when we hold on to our concepts about how things appear, this is not the
absolute truth of how things really are, and so on the absolute level of how things are, the nature
of everything is the same, and when we hold on to the limitations of our own perceptions, as if
they're truly real, meaning they have no limitation, then we're mistaken. By grasping onto our
limited
perceptions, as compared to children believing that they're games, that they play are real.
So when we understand our experience without any limitations or grasping, then that is realizing
absolute truth, which is called enlightenment, and then they go on to say that our normal awareness
is based on habits, and so grasping onto these habits will not lead to a fuller understanding
or enlightenment, but it will only make our habits stronger, and so who is making these habits, who
these judgments, conceptions, perceptions, we feel that I am making these, and who is this I, and
this
I is one's own mind, and then they say then look to one's own mind, when we do this we can't find
a truly existent solid real object which is our mind, and not finding that solidly existing mind
is called emptiness, and so then they say this emptiness doesn't mean that it's nothingness or
non-existence, because the mind is constantly moving. When awareness, our mind moves based on
habits, this is called confused habitual mind, and when our awareness moves without being
restricted
by any habits, the Rinpoche is called this clarity. So these beautiful expressions of our mind when
it's not grasping include things like love, compassion, and wisdom, and so then this is
more or less the first third of this chapter, and so then if someone would read this point which is
related here, and discuss. If we look carefully at the mind we begin to understand its nature,
when we look for the mind we discover how difficult it is to find, we cannot put it in our hands,
we cannot see it or its nature, the mind is a vast emptiness called shunyata or great emptiness,
the emptiness nature does not mean that it is blank or a black hole, the mind has many beautiful
qualities like clarity and wisdom, yet these qualities are inseparable from emptiness.
Anyone have any opening remarks to this topic? Particularly later on in that paragraph when
they talk about the emptiness nature, it doesn't mean that it's blank or a black hole. I was
wondering if actually if you and Lya and you're going to speak more to that because I know many
of times when someone's new to talking about particularly emptiness, the word emptiness itself
kind of catches them because it always seems like the first thing is to go to that thought of blank
or void, so maybe if people could speak more to that I think it'd be really useful for a lot of
people.
Definitely what is it empty of? When we look to see the mind then we're looking for a mind that's
really truly there as if there's an object there that we can find. So what is the shape? Is it a
thing? How big is it? Where is it? Let's say if we look for the mind like that then we don't find
it
and so instead what do we find? This constant changing awareness, this love or compassion,
there's always our mind is always there, concepts are always happening, thoughts are always
happening,
there's always expression even if there's not a solid fixed anything there that's the source of
that expression. So they say it's full of love and compassion, it's infinitely expressive of those
goodness qualities but if you look where is there that actual fixed source of this me or this some
kind of fixed core of them then we don't find them and the thing which is that is empty of that
fixed
the fixedness. What do you think?
So what is the condition area? Okay so that's point two so we'll hold off on the conditioning part.
I think here like on page 20 they say emptiness is a source of all mental activity and all
movements
of the mind are pervaded by primordial awareness. The primordial nature of the mind is not separate
from the relative phenomenon we perceive right now and then later they say the Buddha and all other
great masters taught that there is nothing to acquire externally. It is only a matter of working
to reveal what we already have. So I thought it might be worth just like on that same note to say
like primordial the chapter is called primordial nature. So what does primordial mean? It means
always less you know it means never has not been a primordial nature it always has been forever.
So everything is the primordial nature in the sense of even the habit patterns and even everything
else is a display actually in the Vajrayana view in the Tibetan Buddhism of that nature of that
emptiness nature because it's never separate from that. Like they said it's not separate from the
relative phenomena we perceive right now and it's not an enlightenment it's not something we'll get
outside of ourselves. Anyway just a thought as far as what is the nature means is something that's
there all the time and primordial means always was and it means like you can't escape the prim
ordial
nature. So I guess I'll keep you back with that question how would how do you see that relating
to that to that use of the word empty particularly you know when we're talking about primordial you
know people I mean Rinpoche's and so many great teachers they all talk about that that fullness
quality in that emptiness you know so I think you know well one thing is like emptiness in one
sense
emptiness is not a thing that's another way of looking at it right emptiness is not like here
in the corner of the room is emptiness everywhere else is something solid and substantial that's
not empty it's absolutely real in the sense of it's tangible like this so from that perspective
it's like emptiness is not something separate from what appears what appears nature of what appears
and also because of like just touching on that primordial there isn't anything that we need to
do or can do even to make it that way make it empty that is its nature so like you know it's
just an interesting thing to think you know we're practicing we're trying to recognize that and
through our meditation practice but it is that way you know whether we see it or not it is that way
what do you so I guess that so for people who are new coming to this then
what's what's something that would be useful particularly when they're when they're grappling
with with just even the word emptiness or the concept emptiness what what's a kind of a gentle
way of coming into that understanding or right about the word openness
open this up the same one I don't know openness that there's there's just that there's lots of
there's lots of room flexibility maybe but no I think flexibility you could but I think more
that quality openness empty you know empty like you're saying has connotations of in here like
when she's mentioned in the paragraph there's it's not black hole but like we're saying really is
empty of substantially existing something okay so that in that quality of everything that's
arising the quality of our mind and then when we investigate appearances carefully using our logic
and then applying that in our meditation and we can maybe begin to at least on an intellectual
level see that the openness of the situation on any level we're really looking at it
that it's not fixed as any one particular thing that it's only that thing
but it's an open there's that open quality and then of course an inseparable from that open
quality are these beautiful qualities of clarity arising energy of compassion and intelligence
and wisdom that are inherent to the mind and here we're dualistic beings connecting with these two
aspects but they're one thing but that's further I think discussion and study and contemplation and
meditation I'm not sure where that time I mean that's definitely good to talk about
and I think definitely I would say that like something that I found really helpful is this
what is it empty of if you look to the mind what is it empty of if you look outside of phenomena
what is it empty of and like and that's in the chapter when I said it's empty of a true existence
so then say what is true existence and it's always defined as if something truly exists
it would be singular independent permanent so if something really truly exists it should be
singular
not have any parts it should be independent and not depend on anything else for it to be the way
it is causing conditions not dependent on causing conditions and it would be permanent unchanging
unaffected by anything so singular independent permanent that would that would be the definition
of true existence and if we look for the mind we feel it's really there this me this I is really
there let me say look to the mind and find that look outside and find something that's singular
independent permanent and if we find that then it'd be truly existing and so it's saying it's
empty of being able to find anything like that when we look so that's really the test can we
find something like that because we might feel there's something like that but can we really
if we look let's look can we find it
and then I guess another another question then that kind of falls within this paragraph
it it seems one of one of the tendencies when someone who's newer starts looking at emptiness
it almost seems like it's jumping right over a little bit into nihilism which I think we've
addressed a little bit in the fact that we're saying what is it actually empty of but you know
if someone's you know trying to you know think about what what makes this not nihilism what
were some points that I think or what are some points that you you all would think that would
would come in handy or some something for people to contemplate on that would that would keep them
into that balance and not dip over into the nihilistic I got I got a point was like
define nihilism first yeah sure what does maybe you say since you're saying
when we talk about like the two extremes you have the eternalism where there is that that fixed
thing
that you know is unchanging which we we counteract with the singular independent and plural not or
permanent thing but but then also on the other end of the spectrum is nihilism which is
nothing exists and therefore there's there's no karma there's no causes and conditions and
nothing truly happening which which tends to lead to this idea that whatever I do doesn't matter
and sometimes they define nihilism too as a belief in the not in the continuity of mind
so when the body dies mind stops they say that is that's nihilism that basically they equate nihil
ism
a lot of times with material only believing in those things which you can tangibly see
and not believing in the continuity of anything more subtle of anything more subtle or awareness
so well I think like on that question in the same as point one if we think of the emptiness of mind
we can think of like um if you look to the mind like it says here we can't we can't put our hands
on it because it doesn't have a simple location like this book has a simple location where like
of some point on a map we kind of can see and locate it in space and time but awareness itself
you can't really just pinpoint exactly where it is but yet but yet we all obviously have awareness
awareness is present right now that's why we can have a conversation and because anything can arise
in that awareness that's why we can have any different thought memories of the past you know
think about the future conceptualize the present the whole reason why we can do that is emptiness
I mean because awareness is present it's empty awareness it's it's totally open anything can
happen within that awareness within the space of mind but yet when you try to pinpoint it
you can't find any location at all you can't put your hands on it so that counters well
eternalism and nihilism because awareness is obviously present you know and it's something
continuous because we have that sense but yet when we pinpoint it we can't make it into something
solid and substantial yeah I've always deeply appreciated how when we're Bache talks about
emptiness you know many times they'll say emptiness awareness or and you know there's
there's always that qualifier that that brings in that quality you know even though we're we're
using the word emptiness which for so many people is charged he's always very mindful to bring in
what's what's the quality that arises out of that emptiness you know what's what's the quality that
even though it's not fixed arises or as they they say here the mind has many beautiful qualities
like clarity and wisdom yet these qualities are inseparable from that emptiness that's always
I deeply appreciate you know how very very clearly that gets highlighted I think
good it was similar to what a man was saying earlier about how to or and also what Andrew how
it's not some far out thing of course the more we look and depending on ours clarity of mind
then we maybe see deeper and deeper and deeper and that's the whole path to enlightenment
but right now as things are you know if we use like all these beautiful tools buddha gave us
we can't deny we're having an experience and yet when we look at the mind look back at the mind
that's seen what can we find when we look out at outer phenomena and examine how it's all working
and functions and things but when we really look at how is that working we we find that's a
it really isn't magical it's uh mysterious it's so it is like this is vivid you know and yet if
if I look back at the mind that's observing this and try to find that that's hard if we when we
really look at on even just just playing outer physical substance the more we look there's nothing
substantially existing looking deep deep deep into it so I think that's another thing it's
not some far out thing it's actually right here and now what we're experiencing in a way I mean
maybe that's too vague also I don't know but but that vividness like our that what the buddha is
talking about is our the experience we're having right now and from this experience right now
whether we look back at the subject out at the object we can find that openness and that like
insubstantial like mirage like amazing illusion you know magical display like it said I mean
and yet it is it's so vivid and we have feelings we have perceptions we can talk we can
do all kinds of things and perceive things and things can be out of our control or you know
but yet that's not different than anything else that's all part of the nature too
so I think that's a step to that what we're talking about but the buddha is talking about
it's not separate from the experience we're having right now I guess that part too that
it's vivid and yet when we really look it's open it's there's that
just about like now like we're just talking about practicing now as we meditate and you know the
point is initially particularly to calm the mind and then so you know most beginners beginning
to practice calming the mind and looking at the mind often they remark oh wow it's just so much
more wild you know so that's pretty obvious in that moment particularly oh there is it's not
look like emptiness you know there's all this all this activity all this arising you know in our
minds you know outside that how we're perceiving things I mean it's just very clearly not look
like you know black holes and then you know just continually along the path it's you know I think
maybe that's a mistake you know that I definitely made in the beginning as I first started
practicing
oh you're thinking it's supposed to be that way so it's supposed to be emptiness this flat like no
thoughts you know trying to like dump out you know what all these qualities which is just
ridiculous
in a way you know pretty quickly you realize that's that's not going to happen even if you want it
to
happen like they're just naturally like this paragraph the mind has many beautiful qualities
and they're naturally arising qualities and you know we can try all we want but it's kind of
silly if you think about it trying to kind of hold in those beautiful qualities so anyway
seeing more and more clearly more and more directly than the nature of those qualities
yeah that seems yeah I think particularly in talking about the oh I'm sorry no that was good
one more I think this it segues nicely into that into the second paragraph and the fact that like
okay so what are we not so much the empty qualities but then what are all these concepts like I
think
the second paragraph highlights that nicely so I don't know if you want to yeah I agree yeah thanks
um yep so then the second section of this chapter just to quickly like go over the bullet points so
we all kind of are on the same page with it before we hit the second topic um surbitures
are saying that when our mind goes to hold on to these outer objects there's three states of mind
that we have like if we go for a pleasant object we want to experience happiness if we go for an
unpleasant object to avoid then we have a feeling of suffering and a neutral object that we don't
really perceive much then we have a neutral feeling neutral sensation and if we repeatedly
kind of go for the pleasant things avoid the unpleasant things then we're reinforcing our
habits and this is called karma um and so the habit strengthens itself as um it's reinforced
again and again it makes it easier to happen in the future and then it just depends on when the
right circumstances are available if that habit's going to arise or not surbitures then say that
all experiences come from mind but by resting in mind's natural state of balance our awareness
naturally becomes clearer and less habituated so meditation stops this wheel of constant habits
and that everything we know and experience is created by mind and that all conceptual thinking
we have is based on our habits and so the habits in our mind then are reflected outwardly in what
we say and what we do with our body and then they go into differentiate at least eight different
levels of mind so very quickly these five types of consciousness about eye consciousness ear
consciousness nose tongue and body and these are a direct sense impression of what we experience
and then after that the sixth consciousness comes in called dualistic consciousness which
strings these sensory experiences together and then comments on them makes them into a story
and puts them into a sequence um and then beneath this sense of dualistic consciousness is what's
called they refer to as the alia so this is this habitual mind or the consciousness store has
it's where our habits are stored and so where our habits come from is this alia and then where they
are stored in and as we reinforce them is this alia but then they go on to say that when we
purify this alia or this subtle level of our dualistic mind we purify it of all habits then
we have what's called non-grasping awareness or primordial nature so the mind purified of all the
habits is called the primordial nature or non-grasping awareness um yeah and so then the difference
between uh whether we suffer or not is really whether we recognize our mind when it's not
grasping onto its own habits and that's what distinguishes sentient beings from buddhas
but regardless of whether we recognize this or not like that um that is the nature of our mind
when it's not holding on to habits um and so it becomes very important for us to see how that our
mind is when it's not holding on to habits and also to see how it is when it does hold on to habits
so then that goes into this second point about this conceptual mind
conceptual thinking operates on the basis of habitual patterns the habits that you repeat
circle back on you again and again and again whatever habits are learned in this lifetime
will be reflected in future lifetimes they are maintained within the mind whatever felt
whatever felt comfortable when you were a child formed into habitual patterns that continue now
that you're grown the habits you establish in your mind are reflected in your behavior
in buddhism this is known as the law of karmic cause and effect
i did have one question here which was we talk about how the mind has some of the beautiful
qualities and we also talk about how your conceptual thinking you know is you know are
these habits and so you know on the outside on paper it's very easy to to see how we distinguish
them but then when we sit down you know it's it's all it's all going on so it's like how
how do you how do you clarify you know what's actually clarity and wisdom what's what's our
habit you know what are the ways that we can start distinguishing these things not so that
we start grasping on to clarity and wisdom as much as to to have that recognition
so they say when the when the mind is balanced it arises in certain ways so they say the nature of
mind is totally balanced but that balance always moves it arises in certain ways so then what are
those ways it arises because if we can look and see if in our mind is it arising in these ways
are these qualities of love and compassion this bodhicitta calmness attentiveness appreciation
these qualities we've heard about so many times if they're actually arising more and more in our
experience then that's one way of seeing that oh this is a balanced state of mind and just what
that's like when we actually can actually calm our body speech and mind to the place where
we're kind of experiencing that where we're experiencing that balance and that kind of
what that's like
and then maybe when we begin to then start getting distracted from that place or like
into one thing or like then maybe that's where we start to be able to observe our habits
like when we can on whatever level of meditation we're doing if we're just
calming the body speech and mind holding the focus i think we can all to some degree have
an experience of that that like lightness and openness and kind of bright bright quality or
i mean there's so many adjectives you could put to it but you know it is peaceful there is a sense
of vividness and lightness and kind of that's there when we actually can find that balance
and that that place and then i think our habits and our concepts are how we
either relate to that or you know just start trying to figure it out or make it something
or just completely forget what we're doing and then we realize oh wait i'm thinking about you
know something else or honing into one sensory experience i mean that's just like really gross
level i think sense of being with the the the qualities of mind as far as that the vivid
brightness wisdom you know forget the words we're using here and then and then our habitual
patterns are that just whenever whatever we fall to which again aren't necessarily bad there are
positive and negative but you know but just at times will tend to draw us away from being aware
and so instead of being aware of the circumstances around us we tend to fall into that habitual
pattern that drags us away from that which can lead to bad or good tendencies depending on the
habitual pattern but it definitely is one of those things that takes you away from being
aware of your surroundings and being able to be the most effective in compassion or in other
actions whereas if you kind of draw away from their habitual patterns it lets you have a more
open mind towards anything that comes into your view i guess even in a simple way of saying it
could be this whether you're distracted or not distracted you know just if you're if you're
distracted and you're following all your ordinary chains like you're saying of just dualistic
grasping onto this following out of that chain grasping into that following that chain of thought
you know that's distraction and i think we all can realize that that's what it is you know and then
oh hopefully there's some moment where we realize oh wow it's just going along with that for a
while
there you know kind of pull back and kind of reconnect and maintain awareness or you know
whatever the practices we're doing but it's you know and that's almost just like a simple way of
saying it and also that part too of building on we might be become aware of habitual patterns we
have that are either just a waste of time or just cause more neurosis and trouble for ourselves and
others directly indirectly and then there's this whole part of our practice of accumulating merit
you know so and then actualizing our bodhicitta which in a way is positive positive response
and positive habitual habits that are built building on something that again it's there
we have that love we have joy we have compassion is just making it more and more
wide and more and more practical and more and more beneficial and more and more actually
being that so there is that that part of the habitual pattern that we're working with too
of not only becoming aware of our negative and once but also the positive too because so
creating more beneficial yeah and again and they may be conceptual but still we're on the path
so it seems like that's just a good thing to as we talk about things that habits are habits you
know
good but they're not all necessarily bad that's it's just the cleaning I think like
on that same note related with habits it's like we all kind of know what a habit what a habit is
you know it's like the highlights of our life those things we keep telling ourselves over and over
again
oh this happened to me oh and then it was so good and you think that thought thousands of times
or hundreds of times or whatever over and over and over and over that habit you know it's a deep
strong habit it's like the highlight reel of your life what you emphasize basically what you
emphasize to yourself and tell yourself I am this way I am that way I did this I did that
and you think according to those terms and it's just like reinforcing every time it's reinforcing
that tendency to think about it you think about it more you think about it over and over again
it oftentimes you know like you were saying that can be that can be positive or that can be
negative
and and what Amanda was saying I think it really that hits the nail on the head grasping yeah how
much are you grasping if you want to know whether your habit is good or bad just look at the
contraction around it is it something that makes you tense more narrow more more more targeted and
like does your mind get more closed or get more open and I think all of us like it's not rocket
science this it's like I think we all know when we are experiencing that we are open and we are
relaxed and we are mental you know so that's that's like I mean it's a corny metaphor but like say
when you see somebody that you haven't seen for a long time that you really love or that there's a
you know like then you have that feeling of just you have a habit of being open and like you know
loving towards them and relaxed and you feel your whole you could be in the worst mood but you see
that person opens up because you have a certain habit with them or you see someone else or
something else which really is like a pet peeve and gets you you know you have a habit of closing
more targeted you know more closing down so I think particularly a lot of what you're saying
here with the concept I think it really brings it in nicely to that last point about how you're
kind of contrasting the habits have these concepts the primordial nature is beyond these concepts
so
I don't know if you want to elaborate more on this I think I mean I would say one point first
before
that third part maybe is it's just totally kind of reiterating what you're saying and also what
you're saying what we're all saying negative habit positive habit and then mind without habits
there's negative grasping positive grasping non grasping there's negative karma positive
karma mind beyond karma but the whole path is I mean here this is talking more about how our
mind is conditioned is grasping is holding and how it is when it's not holding but the path of
realizing our mind when it's not holding is doing this really positive healthy holding in a way
this accumulation of merit doing love and goodness compassion these qualities do we're trying to do
we have a sense of self we try to do them but it's positive habit a positive concept more accurate
more fully expressive so in the end we're not giving up all these things and realizing that I'm
no one like all my habits are gone and you know I'm some bland blank no person it's actually we're
becoming more flexible more full more fully expressive of our nature and that's another
way that emptiness it doesn't mean without qualities it means infinitely flexible infinitely
full of qualities so in that sense that it's good emptiness more flexible
so then this third and final section of the chapter is specifically related to these concepts
and Rinpoche's are saying here in this third section of the chapter that the primordial nature
is beyond concepts it's beyond all duality all grasping and that duality mind can be explained
with concepts but non-conceptual non-dual awareness cannot be explained by concepts
and all we can do is look at our own mind and directly experience its nature and so then they
go on Rinpoche's going to say two stories about this the first being about a more or less a prince
who forgot he was a prince and as a result suffered all these kind of usual experiences that we go
through and then upon remembering that he was a prince all of a sudden instantly like was totally
out of the turmoil of usual trying to find food and shelter and instantly had is all the things
that come with knowing you're a prince so he recognized that who he was and all of a sudden
all these good things were there and then they go on to say that the only difference between
sentient beings and a buddha is it's that buddhas recognize this nature beyond concepts and
sentient
beings hold on to their concepts and so we don't recognize that nature but the nature itself is the
same for buddhas and non-buddhas or sentient beings and the key way of actually becoming
buddhas ourselves is this great joyful effort to continually try to recognize our nature when it's
not grasping and then when we stop grasping entirely we become buddhas so then that's the
third part of the chapter and then the point here if someone would read bring it all together
the primordial nature is beyond all concepts is the beginning of the mind and the end of the mind
we already have it we do not need anything further the buddha and other great masters taught there
is
nothing to acquire externally it is only a matter of working to reveal what we already have
describing the true nature in words is like looking through a window and seeing the sky as
square the actual nature of the mind cannot be expressed since it is completely beyond concepts
all we can do is look at our own at your own mind and experience its primordial nature
when you are able to maintain that state you reach enlightenment
i have a quick report on this which really helped me as far as meditation
one time a meditator friend he said the most natural thing you can do in the whole world is
just sit there and relax sit still recognize that and just relax so in other words like
this is on this point like beyond all concepts so we're not twisting something not trying to
make something anything that it's not not trying to make what is something that it's not oh i wish
it was this way or i wish it was that way or this and that you know changing and manipulating
things
so it's like basically not manipulating not trying to manipulate the circumstances so that it of
course with what way you want it to go and change it from the way you don't want it to go so anyway
i just and remember today here there's nothing to do just just to sit and relax but that was
helpful
for me because it just it's like this is not something strange and unusual meditating and the
buddhist path and it's just it's the most natural thing in the whole world actually because you're
not trying to force things to be some way that they're not you're just relaxing expect as soon
as you start to do meditation that instantly you will have some thing that you've seen before
read before this is what happens when i meditate it's like no you have to release those concepts
and completely free the mind of that type of thing before you can really understand what it's about
i had a brief question um you know we then we've talked about this a little bit there's that
positive grasping where we we of course we want to accumulate merit and we want to accumulate
wisdom but at the same time we're recognizing that it's it's not for those accumulations themselves
you know as much as recognizing the nature which has more which has that empty quality
and as you just described it that more neutral quality and maybe i i guess one of the the
questions i had particularly for for people who are a little newer to this how is it that you're
able to simultaneously understand how it is to engage in positive grasping while still having
that more open flexible kind of quality understanding in your meditation
i think in one way it comes to motivation why am i sitting and meditating why am i trying to
develop these good qualities at one level of the buddhist teaching it is because we have suffering
and we want to be out of that suffering but a little more open little more flexible little more
kind of breezy approaches we're doing this for everybody we all have this trouble we all have
this suffering and not just about me and my problem but all these beings everyone and to really
kind
of engage in a little more open way like a motivation that's a little bigger than just
always looking only at our own situation then i think this actually really brings that openness
it can help really bring more of that openness with these good qualities too not just my love
my good experiences but for everybody i like to genuinely try to more and more genuinely feel that
and i think it touches on earlier what was saying the inseparability of appearances and
openness or the nature that there's that quality we're looking at distinctions
as part of the process but the buddha never said they were separate
that and i think that's something to do we're we're always trying to mingle our meditation
and our practice with our activities we're not like dropping dropping everything as soon as we
stand up you know we're trying to we're touching home with our formal practice and kind of finding
home base like when pache says a lot and then we're moving from there remembering our bodhicitta
remembering wherever we're whatever we find in our meditation and i thought too just one point with
just that word meditation that i found helpful too is that in tibetan how meditation one meaning it
means to become familiar so like familiarizing ourselves with the primordial nature with that
openness qualities familiar with how ceaselessly and unimpededly everything's arising and how
vivid things are and as well as just becoming more familiar with like just how precious our
situation is and impermanence and karma and i mean all those levels of familiarity of study
contemplation meditation i mean ultimately the buddhist teachings are all about that
becoming more and more familiar with the nature as it is and seeing what what kind of
occludes that and obscures that and what reveals that more and so that part of our practice too
with bodhicitta and actualizing generating you know accumulating our merit and doing you know
the paramitas you know generosity you know morality patience you know all apply the joyful
effort and then those are qualities of we're touching we're engendering more and we're touching
home more and we're focusing more on connecting with these qualities of of like that nature
that's arising and shining you know that those those aren't those are more more natural than
unnatural what's unnatural is the grasping so to speak or what but just closest we're getting close
to the end of our time we are going to meditate shortly and dedicate we need to sum any of that out
i can't wrap it up
you know i would just and we'll just like what you said like they say in this chapter the whole the
whole shebang of samsara and nirvana comes from one's own nature so we're we're like dreamers
who are asleep who have either samsara dream or nirvana dream so we have the power because the
nature means it is like what is real the nature is the actual real thing and like they say so many
times in here i just thought to just just highlight temporary observations temporary
nightmares temporary grasping temporary that means comes and goes it's not intrinsic feature
primordial nature that's the title of the chapter never comes and goes always was always there
always will be there always was there is there right now so anyway if the whole thing is a dream
of samsara and nirvana and the whole shebang comes from life itself then all this accumulating
positive and meditation and everything is just to wake up it's such a good metaphor
wake up and realize we're dreaming you're like oh it is the nature you can never escape it hahaha
you know like i'm enlightened now now let's share it with everybody you know because we're asleep
you know until you wake up so anyway i just that reminded me of how the whole thing is in the
context of that the whole buddhist path that's why enlightenment is called awake waking up from the
dream that's samsara and nirvana are something real and solid outside of the primordial nature of
life
oh
ah
may the soul source of benefit and happiness
and may the victory banner of the lives of the noble ones the holders of the teachings remain firm
may all sentient beings always be joyful may all grace into the lower ground cease forever
may the wishes of all the buddhist alphas and all the boomies swiftly reach fruition
at this very moment for the peoples and nations of the earth may not even the names disease famine
war and suffering be heard but rather in pure conduct merit wealth and prosperity increase
and may supreme good fortune and well-being always aras the precious bodhicitta and those
without it may be generated and those who have it may never diminish but always continue increasing
may the great tradition of kenpo shantra shitta lopan patma sambhava and arma king tritsa and
detsan increase and spread throughout the three realm world may the appearance of the three jewels
and the mind streams of beings remain inseparable and brings sublime well-being throughout the
three
times deity mantra and dharmakaya nor the nature of appearance sound and awareness the pervasive
kaya and wisdom display of the buddhist may practitioners of the profound and secret great
perfection remain inseparable from the inner most one takes the awareness of wisdom mind